Ordinary Diﬀerential Equations
3D-Filmstrip knows how to calculate and display solutions of the initial value problem for ﬁrst and second order systems of ordinary diﬀerential equations
(ODE) in one, two, or three dependent variables.
Let us recall brieﬂy what this means. We will be
dealing with vector-valued functions x of a single real
variable t called the “time”. Here x can take values
in R, R2 , or R3 . The problem is to ﬁnd x from a
knowledge of how x depends on x and the t (in the
ﬁrst order case) or a knowledge of how its x depends
on x, x , and t (in the second order case). Thus in
the ﬁrst order case the ODE we are trying to solve
has the form x = f (x, t) and in the second order case
it is x = f (x, x , t).
In the ﬁrst order case, the so-called Local Existence
Theorem for First Order ODE tells us that provided
the function f is diﬀerentiable, given an “initial time”
t0 , and an “initial position” x0 , then in some suﬃciently small interval around t0 , there will be a unique
solution x(t) to the ODE with x(t0 ) = x0 .
There is a similar local existece theorem for second
order ODE (which in fact is an easy consequence of
1

the ﬁrst order theorem). It says that given an initial
time t0 , an initial position x0 , and an initial velocity
v0 then, in some suﬃciently small interval around t0 ,
there will be a unique solution x(t) of the ODE with
x(t0 ) = x0 and x (t0 ) = v0 .
Theory provides not only an abstract existence theorem, but also many explicit numerical algorithms
for ﬁnding approximating solutions, in terms of the
function f and the initial data. One of the all-time
favorites for general purposes is the so-called Fourth
Order Runge-Kutta Method, and this is the one that
3D-Filmstrip uses.
Although the overall approach to solving such ODE is
quite similar for ﬁrst and second order ODE and for
the various dimensions, the details for giving initial
conditions and for displaying solutions are diﬀerent
for each case, and for that reason instead of having
a single ODE category, it turns out to be convenient
to have six. The naming of these categories is fairly
self-evident. For example, the ODE(1D) 1stOrder
Category deals with the case that x take values in R,
and the equation is ﬁrst order, while the ODE(3D)
2ndOrder Category deals with the case that x take
values in R3 , and the equation is second order.
2

For the ODE(1D) 2ndOrder order category, the usual
reduction is made to a ﬁrst order system in two variables (x, u) where u represents x .
In the case of the ODE(2D) 1stOrder category, the
orbit is drawn dotted, with a constant time interval
between dots. This gives a valuable visual clue concerning the velocity at which the orbit is traced out,
but if you wish to turn this feature oﬀ, just set Dot
Spacing to zero using the ODE Settings... dialog (see
below).
In all the ODE categories, when you have chosen either a particular pre-programmed example (or set up
your own, using the User Deﬁned. . . feature) then as
with the other categories you will ﬁrst see a visualization of a default solution. This display will usually
stop quickly on its own, but you can also click the
mouse button (or type Command period) to stop it.
You may then choose the item “ODE Settings. . .” in
the Settings menu and this will allow you to set the
various data the program needs to compute and display an orbit, namely:
a) the initial time,
b) the time-span,
3

c) the step-size (used in the Runge-Kutta method),
d) the initial value of x, and (in a second order case)
e) the initial value of x .
Choosing Create from the Main menu will then display the solution for these newly selected settings.
There is an ODE control panel that opens by default
just below the main display window. This has buttons to do more easily things you can also do with
the menus (Create, Erase, Continue, double or half
the scale, and bring up the dialog to set initial conditions, step-size, time-span, and dottedness). In addition there are buttons for single-stepping the ODE
forward or backward, and there is a read-out of the
current time, position, and velocity. This control
panel can be hidden using the Hide ODE Controls
command of the Action menu (and then may be reopened with the Show ODE Controls command).
The main display shows the evolution of an orbit in
the phase space. By default, the program also shows
projections of the orbit on the coordinate axes (using
diﬀerent colors to distinguish the projections). This
display occurs in a second pane of the graphics window that opens automatically below the main pane.
4

This pane can be hidden by choosing ”Hide Direction
Fields” from the Action menu. There is a rectangular
button at the right edge of the screen where the two
panes meet. If you press on this button, the button
itself will disappear and be replaced by a horizontal
line. Drag the horizontal line to where you would
like the new boundary between panes and release the
mouse. (At least twenty percent of the total screen
height must be devoted to each pane.)
For ﬁrst order ODE in one and two dimensions, the
program by default displays the direction ﬁeld deﬁned by the current ODE. (Since second order ODEs
in one variable are reduced to ﬁrst order ODEs in
two variables, the direction ﬁeld is also shown in this
case.) The direction ﬁeld of a time dependent ODE
is updated every few integration steps. (As far as I
know, 3D-Filmstrip is the only publicly available program that shows direction ﬁelds for time-dependent
ODE.) For the ODE(3D) 2ndOrder category there is
also a direction ﬁeld shown (when the display is in
stereo) for the special case of a charged particle in a
magnetic ﬁeld—but be careful, the ﬁeld shown is the
magnetic ﬁeld, not the direction of the Lorentz force
acting on the particle.
5

It is fairly easy to do a rough “phase space analysis”
by keeping the other data ﬁxed and varying the initial values. To make this easier, in certain categories
it is possible to choose the initial conditions using the
mouse. For example, in the ODE(1D) 1stOrder category, each time you click the mouse in the window,
the forward and backward orbits are drawn through
that initial value. Similarly, clicking the mouse in
the ODE(1D) 2ndOrder category and ODE(2D) 1st
Order category also creates an orbit with the mouse
point as initial condition. Surprisingly, something
similar even works for the ODE(2D) 2ndOrder category. Here to choose an initial condition AND velocity, either select IC By Mouse [Drag] from the Action
menu or type Control I. You may then click and drag
the mouse to choose the initial position (click) and
velocity (drag).

6

