About the Koch Snowflake (or Island)*
The Koch Snowflake Curve (aka the Koch Island) is a fractal planar curve of infinite length and dimension approximately 1.262. It is defined as the limit of a sequence of
polygonal curves defined recursively as follows:
1) The first polygon is an equilateral triangle.
2) The (n+1)-st polygon is created from the n-th polygon
by applying the following rule to each edge: construct
an equilateral triangle with base the middle third of
the edge and pointing towards the outside of the polygon, then remove the base of this new triangle.
Note that at each step the number of segments increases
by a factor 4 with the new segments being one third the
length of the old ones. Since all end points of segments
are already points on the limit curve we see that no part
of the limit curve has finite length.
Actually this is true for a 1-parameter family of similar
constructions: Vary the parameter aa (Set Parameters
in the Settings Menu) in the interval [0.25, 0.5] and watch
how the iterations evolve or choose Morph in the Animation
Menu and observe the deformation of the limit curves.
Hausdorff Dimension: Consider the union of those disks
which have a segment of one polygonal approximation as
a diameter, then this union covers all the further approximations. From one step to the next the diameter of the
disks shrinks to one third while the number of disks is mul* This file is from the 3D-XplorMath project. Please see:
http://3D-XplorMath.org/

1

tiplied by 4—so that the area of these covering disk unions
converges to zero. The fractal Hausdorff d-measure is defined as the infimum (as the diameter goes to zero) of the
quantity (diameter)d × (number-of-disks), and the fractal
Hausdorff dimension is the infimum of those d for which the
d-measure is 0. This shows that the Hausdorff dimension
of the Koch curve is less than or equal to log(4)/ log(3),
and since the union of the disks of every second segment
does not cover the limit curve one can conclude that the
Hausdorff dimension is precisely log(4)/ log(3).
The artist Escher has made rather complicated fundamental domains for tilings of the plane by modifying the boundary between neighboring tiles. This idea can be used to illustrate the flexibility of fractal constructions: Select from
the Action Menu of the Koch Snowflake Choose Escher
Version and observe:
The new polygonal curves remain boundaries of tiles of the
plane under the iteration steps that make them more and
more complicated.
Finally, one can choose in the Action Menu to map any
selected Fractal curve by either the complex map z → z 2
or by the complex exponential. The program waits for a
mouse click and then chooses the mouse point as origin.
Note that one gets the graph of a continuous function if
one plots the x-coordinate of a continuous curve against
the curve parameter. This can be viewed with the last
Action Menu entry.
H.K.
2

