About the Plane Curves Category
A plane curve is described by a map of an interval, [tM in, tM ax] in t-space into (x, y)-space. Each
point t is mapped to a two-dimensional point P with
coordinates (x(t), y(t)). The mapping is given by
two real-valued functions that give the values of x
and y as a function of the t and nine global “parameters”, called aa, bb, cc, dd, ee, ff, gg, hh, ii. Most
curves use only 1,2,3 or even none of these parameters. (For example, an ellipse depends on two semiaxes, aa and bb). To discretize the curve, the interval
[tM in, tM ax] is subdivided into tResolution equispaced points running from tM in to tM ax. These
points divide the domain interval into subintervals.
When a curve is “Create”-ed, the mapping t → (x, y)
is applied to each of the subdivision points, so each of
the subintervals in t-space is mapped to a segment in
the plane, and this collection of segments is a polygon
that is what actually represents the immersed curve.
When you have selected a particular curve from
the Plane Curve menu, a version with certain default
parameter values will be displayed. You can then
choose “About This Object...” from the Action Menu
1

to see the equations for the curve as a function of t
and the parameters, (and perhaps to see some interesting properties of the curve). You can change the
parameters in the Settings Menu and then re-Create
the curve.
The program can also interpolate linearly between two curves of the same family that you can set
by choosing “Set Morphing...” in the Settings Menu.
The number of steps in the “morph” is the Number of
Frames in the ﬁlmstrip, an integer that you can also
set. Playing back the ﬁlmstrip gives a “movie” of the
curve changing gradually (“morphing”) between the
initial and ﬁnal curves.
A user can deﬁne a curve by choosing one of the
User Deﬁned... items from the Plane Curve menu.
This will bring up a dialog that will permit one to create algebraic expressions describing the curve involving the variables t and the nine parameters, aa, bb, ..., ii.
Note that if you want to create the graph of a function, f (x), i.e., display the curve y = f (x), then you
can use the parametric equations x(t) := t, y(t) :=
f (t).
The user can also deﬁne a plane curve by giving its curvature, k, as a function of t (and the usual
2

parameters aa, ...ii). To do this choose User (Curvature)... from the Planar Curves menu. The resulting
curve will have t as its arclength parameter, and will
start (at t = 0) from the origin with tangent the
unit vector in the x direction. (By the fundamental theorem of plane curves, there is a unique such
curve.) The interval [tM in, tM ax] must contain zero
of course—or the curve will be empty.
See the corresponding discussion in About the
Surface Category for more detail on how to enter expressions.
Plane curves can also be given “implicitly”, as
the solutions of an equation, f(x,y) = constant. There
are three curves in the Plane Curve menu that are
given this way, the Cuspidal Cubic, y 2 − x3 = f f ,
the Nodal Cubic, y 2 − x2 ∗ (1 − x) = f f , and the
Tacnodal Quartic, y 3 + y 2 − x4 = f f . There is also
a User (Implicit)... menu item in the Plane Curve
menu, that brings up a dialog that will let you enter
an expression (deﬁning a function f (x, y)) a value for
f f , and a rectangle in the x, y-plane. Clicking on the
Create button will display the solution of f (x, y) =
f f inside the rectangle.

3

There are several items in the Plane Curve menu
that create special animations:
First there is Show Parallel Curves. This ﬁrst
draws the normals to the selected plane curve, from
the curve to the center of the osculating circle. It then
leaves behind a trace of the evolute (the locus of all
centers of osculating circles) and draws the parallel
curves to the selected curve. (Singularities develop
when the parallel curve reaches the evolute.)
Secondly, there is Draw Generalized Cycloid. This
rolls a circle (of radius hh) on the selected curve, and
a point D along a ﬁxed radius traces out a curve.
(If ii = 0 the drawing point, D, is the center of the
circle, if ii = 1, it is the point on the rim, and in
general ii is the signed distance from the center in
units of the radius. Changing the sign of hh will
change the side of the curve on which the circle rolls.
If gg is not zero, then the value of hh (the radius) is
modiﬁed to the nearest value that makes the length
of the circle go an integral number of times into the
length of the curve (so that the cycloid closes up). If
you change the parameters gg, hh, ii, and then choose
Draw Generalized Cycloid again, then a new generalized cycloid is drawn of course, and the old one is
4

ﬁrst erased unless you hold down Shift as you make
the menu selection.
Finally, selecting Draw Osculating Circles will
draw (in blue) the osculating circles of a selected
parametric curve (and their radii) at a point that
moves along the curve. As the point moves, the centers of the osculating circles trace out the evolute of
the curve in red. (If you press the Shift key while selecting Draw Osculating Circles, the normals to the
radii of the osculating circles will be drawn in red
before the osculating circles are drawn.)

5

