Part I: Platonic Solids*
Relations among them, Simple Truncations
Part II below: Archimedean Solids,
includes: Cubeoctahedron, Icosidodecahedron, Buckyball
Part III below: Dual Polyhedra
There are five (and only five) Platonic solids. Three of
them are easy to imagine — Cube, Octahedron and Tetrahedron — while the remaining two are more diﬃcult: Icosahedron and Dodecahedron. The earliest known models
date from the Stone Age.

What to do in 3D-XplorMath?
First, the program shows how the other four Platonic solids
are obtained from the Cube: Select first one of the other
polyhedra, then in the Action Menu:
Show Relation with Cube.
For the Octahedron one sees that its six vertices are the
midpoints of the faces of a cube; the Octahedron faces are
equilateral triangles. The Tetrahedron sits in the cube so
that its four vertices are vertices of the Cube, and the six
Tetrahedron edges are face diagonals of the Cube. The
Icosahedron can be placed inside a Cube so that its twelve
vertices lie on the six faces of the Cube: see the default
* This file is from the 3D-XplorMath project. Please see:
http://3D-XplorMath.org/

1

morph in 3DXM, preferably when Show Relation with
Cube is chosen. The Dodecahedron can be placed around
a Cube so that its twelve pentagon faces rest on the twelve
edges of the cube. See again the default morph going from
the Rhombic Dodecahedron via the Platonic Dodecahedron to a cube with subdivided faces.
Second, by cutting oﬀ appropriately the vertices or the
edges of a Platonic solid one obtains the simpler ones of the
Archimedean solids. These are polyhedra whose faces
are (several kinds of) regular polygons, whose edges all
have the same length and whose vertices all look the same.
Select in the Action Menu any of the three Truncations
and then do the associated default Morph. For example,
the Edge Truncations morph from one Platonic solid to
another one (which is called its dual).
Third, since our intuition handles two dimensions better
than three, it is interesting to project the Platonic solids
from their midpoints onto a circumscribed sphere. View
in Wire Frame and select in the Action Menu:
Show Central Projection to Sphere
.
These two-dimensional spherical views of the Platonic solids
come very close to explaining why there are no other such
beautiful polyhedra.
Fourth, the Icosahedron and the Dodecahedron have very
beautiful Stellations, polyhedra that fascinated Kepler. Select (Action Menu): Create Stellated. Note that all the
mentioned views have their own default morphs. Kepler
2

imagined the stellated Dodecahedron as having pentagon
stars as faces. One can also select it in the Polyhedra Menu
as Kepler’s Great Dodecahedron. In 3DXM it is drawn
as a (negative) stellation of the Icosahedron.
Fifth, for the Cube and the Icosahedron there are two special entries in the Action Menu when viewing these solids
in Wire Frame. For the Cube select Show Intersection
With Plane, preferably in one of the stereo modes. The
plane is represented by random dots and the dots inside
the Cube are deleted; the Cube can be rotated and moved
forward and backward, always showing its polygonal intersection with the plane. For the Icosahedron select in
the Action Menu Add Borromean Link, preferably in one
of the stereo modes. Note how the boundaries of the emphasized rectangles are intertwined or linked. The edge
lengths of each rectangle are equal to the lengths of an
edge and a diagonal of a regular pentagon, thus showing
the relation of the Icosahedron inside the Cube with the
Golden Ratio. Also, the default morph of this image is
worth viewing.
Finally, stone objects with Platonic Symmetry were found,
mainly in Scotland. They were dated 2500 B.C. They are
carved from bigger stones, but they look as if they were
conceived as collections of balls. Therefore we have added
the Action Menu entry: Show As Stone Balls. In Patch
Display the balls are fine triangulations of the Bucky Ball,
in Wire Frame the balls are shown with random dots. One
3

can also view other sphere triangulations after one has
selected (in Patch Display) Create Subdivided: another
entry appears: Triangulate Further.
Part II: Archimedean Solids
Here is the definition again: All faces are regular polygons
(of up to three diﬀerent kinds). All edges have the same
length. All vertices (with their outgoing edges) are congruent. In addition to the five Platonic solids there are
twelve of them.
We have already seen the simplest ones: Truncate the vertices of a Platonic solid; there are two possibilities, if some
portion of the edges remain this is called Standard Truncation, and if the truncation cuts go through the midpoints of the edges we have a Midpoint Truncation. One
can also truncate the edges; this deformation leads to
the same Archimedean solid if one starts from the Octahedron or the Cube, and also if one starts from the Icosahedron or the Dodecahedron. Two more are obtained if
one truncates the edges and the vertices; the deformation
is easier to observe if one uses the standard truncation on
either the Cubeoctahedron or the Icosidodecahedron. In
fact, not quite the standard truncation, because that would
make rectangles instead of squares from the truncated vertices.
Finally there are the Snub Polyhedra. We could not find
what ’snub’ means in this context. We describe the construction and call it ’to snub’. Each face of a Platonic
4

solid is scaled down from its midpoint and also rotated
around the midpoint. The ’snubbed’ polyhedron is the
convex hull of these deformed faces. This 2-parameter deformation can be adjusted to give a 1-parameter family
of polyhedra whose faces are either regular polygons or
isosceles triangles. In each family is an Archimedean solid.
A snubbed Tetrahedron is an Icosahedron, snubbed Cube
and Octahedron give the same Archimedean solid and also
snubbed Dodecahedron and Icosahedron agree.
One can probably understand all these truncations better
if one selects in the Action Menu
Snub Or Truncate Polyhedron In Polyhedron.
This will add the original polyhedron (as wire frame) to
the truncation.
Adapted Morphs: Each selection in the Action Menu
will cause that the default deformation, Morph in the Animation Menu, is adjusted to the Action Menu selection.
Part III: Dual Polyhedra
Duality has the simplest definition for Platonic solids: The
convex hull of the centers of the faces is the dual polyhedron. The following definition works for Platonic and
Archimedean solids: Take the tangent planes to the circumscribed sphere at the vertices of the polyhedron; consider them as the boundaries of halfspaces which contain
the polyhedron; the intersection of these halfspaces is the
dual polyhedron. For example the rhombic dodecahedron
is dual to the cubeoctahedron. Similarly, consider convex
5

polyhedra whose inscribed sphere touches all faces; the
convex hull of the contact points of the faces with the inscribed sphere is the dual polyhedron.
These definitions of duality are unique up to scaling. For a
general convex polyhedron definitions are no longer unique
up to scaling. Choose an interior point and project the
polyhedron radially onto a sphere around the chosen point;
one obtains a tessalation of the sphere with the same combinatorial properties as the boundary of the polyhedron;
consider on the sphere the Dirichlet or Voronoi domains of
the vertices (the points which are closer to one vertex than
to all others); these domains form the dual tessalation; any
polyhedron whose radial projection to the sphere has the
same combinatorics as this dual tessalation, is called a dual
polyhedron to the given one.
In 3D-Xplormath one can view all Archimedean solids inside their dual polyhedra: First select one of the Platonic
solids from the Polyhedra Menu. Then check in the Action
Menu the entry:
Show All Polyhedra Inside Their Duals
.
Now, each of the provided truncations gives an Archimedean
solid, shown inside its dual polyhedron. These images can
be morphed, including the surrounding dual polyhedra.
H.K.

6

