About the Space Curves Category
A space curve is described by a map of an interval,
[tM in, tM ax] in t-space into (x, y)-space. Each point
t is mapped to a three-dimensional point P with coordinates (x(t), y(t), z(t)). The mapping is given by
three real-valued functions that give the values of
x(t), y(t), and z(t) as a function of the t and nine
global “parameters”, called aa, bb, cc, . . . , ii. Most
curves use only 1,2,3 or even none of these parameters. To discretize the curve, the interval [tM in, tM ax]
is subdivided into tResolution equi-spaced points running from tM in to tM ax. These points divide the
domain interval into subintervals. When a curve is
“Create”-ed, the mapping t → (x, y, z) is applied to
each of the subdivision points, so each of the subintervals in t-space is mapped to a segment in 3-space,
and this collection of segments is a polygon that is
what actually represents the immersed curve.
When you have selected a particular curve from the
Space Curve menu, a version with certain default parameter values will be displayed. You can then choose
“About This Object...” from the Action Menu to see
the equations for the curve as a function of t and
1

the parameters, (and perhaps to see some interesting
properties of the curve). You can change the parameters in the Settings Menu and then re-Create the
curve.
The program can also interpolate linearly between
two curves of the same family that you can set by
choosing “Set Morphing...” in the Settings Menu.
The number of steps in the “morph” is the Number
of Frames in the ﬁlmstrip, an integer that you can also
set. Playing back the ﬁlmstrip gives a “movie” of the
curve changing gradually (“morphing”) between the
initial and ﬁnal curves.
A user can deﬁne a curve by choosing one of the User
Deﬁned... items from the Space Curve menu. This
will bring up a dialog that will permit one to create
algebraic expressions describing the curve involving
the variables t and the nine parameters, aa, bb, . . . , ii.
You can also deﬁne a space curve by giving its curvature, κ, and its torsion, τ , as a function of t (and
the usual parameters aa, . . . , ii). To do this choose
User (Curvature & Torsion)... from the Space Curves
menu. The resulting curve will have t as its arclength
parameter, and will start (at t = 0) from the origin
with tangent the unit vector in the x direction. (By
2

the fundamental theorem of space curves, there is a
unique such curve.) The interval [tM in, tM ax] must
contain zero of course—or the curve will be empty.
See the corresponding discussion in About the Surface Category for more detail on how to enter expressions.
Space curves can also be given “implicitly”, as the solutions of two equation, f (x, y, z) = ff and g(x, y, z) =
gg. There is a User (Implicit)... menu item in the
Space Curve menu that brings up a dialog that will let
you enter expressions (deﬁning the function f (x, y, z))
and g(x, y, z) and values for ff and gg, and a rectanglular box in the x, y, z-space. Clicking on the Create button will display the simultaneous solution of
f (x, y, z) = ff and g(x, y, z) = gg inside the box.
The Action Curve menu has an item “Show as Tube”.
If you select it, the current space curve will be drawn
as a “tube”, i.e., instead of the curve itself being
drawn, a surface that is the boundary of a tube with
polygonal cross-section centered on the curve gets
drawn. The cross-section of the tube is a regular
n-gon, where n = 4 by default, but you can choose
any value between 3 and 18 in the Set Resolution
And Scale dialog. To draw the tube it is necessary to
3

choose a frame ﬁeld along the curve. There are two
natural choices—the Frenet frame ﬁeld and a parallel
frame ﬁeld. The Frenet frame is chosen by default,
but you can switch between them using the Action
menu.
A good way to see the Frenet “moving trihedral” (or
the parallel one) is to choose “Show Repère Mobile”
from the Action menu. This is particularly striking
in stereo! Another interesting animation is provided
by showing projections of a small part of the curve
on the osculating, normal, and rectifying planes (or
on all three!) at a point that moves along the curve.
Again, this is best seen in stereo.

4

