About the Surface Category
A surface is described by a map of a rectangle in the space R2 with coordinates (u, v) into the
space R3 with coordinates (x, y, z). The rectangle
is the product of the intervals [uM in, uM ax] and
[vM in, vM ax], and each point (u, v) in the rectangle
is mapped to a 3-dimensional point P with coordinates (x(u, v), y(u, v), z(u, v)). The mapping is given
by writing Pascal procedures that deﬁne the components of P as functions of u, v and nine global “parameters”, called aa, bb, cc, dd, ee, f f, gg, hh, and ii.
Most surfaces need only 1,2,3 or even none of these
parameters. (For example, an ellipsoid depends on
three semi-axes, aa, bb, cc).
To discretize the surface, the domain in (u,v)
space is divided into a grid which has uResolution
equi-spaced points in the u-direction, running from
uM in to uM ax, and vResolution equi-spaced points
in the v-direction running from vM in to vM ax. This
grid divides the (u, v) domain rectangle into subrectangles. When a surface is ”Create”-ed, the mapping
(u, v) → (x, y, z) is applied to each of the grid points,
so each of the subrectangles in (u, v)-space is mapped
1

to a quadrilateral in (x, y, z)-space called a “patch”.
The collection of these patches is what actually represents the surface immersed in 3-dimensional space.
(For more details on the discretization process, see
the discussion of “Resolution Factor” in the “View”
Help panel).
To “see” the surface, it is necessary to make a 2dimensional projection of these patches on the screen.
To do this, the program projects each patch (either in
perspective or orthographically) onto a plane (“ImagePlane”) at a distance (“FocalLength”) from the
“ViewPoint”. ImagePlane is orthogonal to a direction called “ViewDirection”, so the line from ViewPoint in the direction of ViewDirection meets the ImagePlane at a point called “ImagePlaneCenter” at a
distance FocalLength from ViewPoint. ImagePlaneCenter is always at the center of the Graphics Window. Of course, a perspective projection has its center of projection at ViewPoint. There is a distance,
called ClipDistance, usually set to a fraction (ClipRatio) of FocalLength, and a patch is “clipped” (i.e., not
projected) if any of its vertices lie behind the ClipPlane (the plane parallel to the Image Plane at a distance ClipDistance from the ViewPoint). One more
2

piece of data is needed to render a patch on the computer screen, namely the relation between distances
in the ImagePlane, and distances on the monitor.
This is deﬁned by an integer called “Graphic-Scale”,
which gives the number of pixels per unit length on
ImagePlane—i.e., on a “standard” monitor, with 72
dpi resolution, a line segment of unit length in ImagePlane will have length Graphic-Scale/72 inches on
the monitor. (The “normal” value of Scale is chosen
to be one-tenth the sum of the height and width of
the Graphics Window in pixels. This has the eﬀect
of scaling objects proportionally to the window size,
and usually gives a value of scale between 70 and
100.) We’ve cheated a little. We still need one ﬁnal
piece of information before we can actually render a
surface on the screen, namely the direction on the
ImagePlane that will point up on the monitor.
By default, patches are sorted by the distance
of their centers to the ViewPoint, and are drawn on
the screen in order of farthest to nearest (“Painter’s
Algorithm”). (The Painter’s Algorithm occassionally
has problems, it fails along a line of double-points of
an immersed surface, but this failure is usually not
serious at reasonably high resolutions).
3

By default, patches are illuminated by a white
light coming from the ViewPoint, and three colored
lights, one red, one green, and one blue coming from
three diﬀerent directions. These colored lights help
give a realistic three-dimensional look to the surface.
The brightness and color of each patch depends on
the cosine of the angle the normal to the patch makes
with the in-coming light directions.
For some purposes it may be better to make
the patches ”transparent” and view the surface as
if it were made of chicken wire. To switch back and
forth, choose either ”Wire Frame” or ”Patch” from
the View menu.
When you have selected a particular surface from
the Surface menu, a version with certain default parameter values will be displayed. You can then choose
“About this Object” from the Action Menu to see
how the surface depends on the parameters, after
which you can change these parameters in the Settings Menu before re-creating the surface.
The program can also interpolate linearly between two surfaces of the same family that you can set
by choosing “Set Morphing...” in the Settings Menu.
The number of steps in the “morphing” is the Num4

ber of Frames in the ﬁlmstrip, an integer that you can
also set. Playing back the ﬁlmstrip gives a “movie”
of the surface changing gradually (“morphing”) between the initial and ﬁnal surface. It is also possible
to rotate the surface in space, and form a ﬁlmstrip
of this rotation that can be played back. This gives
a very good illusion of seeing the three-dimensional
nature of the surface., but is even easier to just rotate
the surface by dragging the mouse across the screen
in a manner that is easier to ﬁgure out by experiment than to explain. If you have red/green glasses
you should do the animations in stereo vision for the
most realistic eﬀects. (Switch back and forth between
stereo and mono vision using the View Menu.)
A user can deﬁne a surface by choosing one of
the User Deﬁned... items from the Surfaces menu.
This will bring up a dialog that will permit one to
create algebraic expressions involving the two surface
variables u and v and the nine parameters, aa,bb, ...
, ii. There is some checking done to see that these
are well-formed formulas, but you should be careful
to avoid other errors (such as an implicit division by
zero) that could have unpredictable consequences. If
you mess up badly in editing the expressions, press
5

the Default button to reset the expressions to their
original values. When you have ﬁnished editing, either press the Create button to immediately create
the surface, or press the OK button and make various choices from the Settings menu before choosing
Create from the Surfaces menu. Note that if you want
to create the graph of a function, f (x, y), i.e., display
the surface z = f (x, y), then you can use the parametric equations P.x = u, P.y = v, and P.z = f (u, v);
The User Deﬁned... surface feature uses David
Eck’s expression parsing and evaluation routines. Expressions can include the operators: +, −, ∗, /, and ↑,
and the available built-in functions are: sin, cos, tan,
cot, csc, sec, sinh, cosh, tanh, coth, arcsin, arccos,
arctan, arccot, exp, ln, sqrt, cubert, abs, round,
trunc, and the three basic Jacobi elliptic functions,
sn, cn, and dn.
After a parametric surface is created, the Show
Parallel Surfaces menu item of the Action menu will
become enabled. Choosing it will ﬁrst show the two
focal sets of the surface and then start an animation
showing the parallel surfaces to the given surfaces
(i.e., the surfaces at a constant distance out along
the surface normal). If you hold down the Shift key
6

during the animation you will be able to see the focal
sets until you release it (the parallel surfaces develop
singularities where they meet the focal sets). Each
press of the right-arrow key will speed up the animation, while each press of the left-arrow key will
slow it down. Pressing the up-arrow key reverses the
direction of the animation.

7

