Torus Knots*
Torus knots are quite popular space curves because they
represent the simplest way to write down knotted curves
in R3 . Our knots are parametrized as


aa + bb · cos(dd · t) · cos(ee · t)
c(t) :=  aa + bb · cos(dd · t) · sin(ee · t) 
cc · sin(dd · t)
with defaults aa = 3, bb = 1.5, cc = 1.5, dd = 5, ee = 2.
The default Morph changes the torus size. If, before the
morph, one chooses in the Action Menu Show As Tube and
Parallel Frame then one notices that the twisting of the
tube (see the ATO of the helix for more details) is clearly
visible already for rather small changes of the shape of the
torus.
The Action Menu has also the entry Show Dotted Torus.
Selecting it adds the torus to the picture. This is more
spectacular when viewing in Anaglyph Stereo Vision,
through red/green filter glasses. Observe that our brain
gets these several thousand dots sorted out into corresponding pairs of red and green dots that then form the
torus surface in R3 - and this seems to happen instantly.
The best method to get a feeling for the curvature of a
space curve is to select in the Action Menu Show Osculating Circles & Evolute. The Radius r of the circle
* This file is from the 3D-XplorMath project. Please see:
http://3D-XplorMath.org/

1

is the radius of curvature of the curve at the current point
and κ := 1/r is called the curvature (at that point). The
direction from c(t) to the midpoint of the osculating circle
determines always the direction of the second basis vector
of the Frenet frame.
If one uses the Parallel Frame, then one has to represent
the curvature by a vector of length κ in the plane spanned
by the two normal vectors of the Parallel frame. If one has
selected, in the Action Menu, Parallel Frame and clicks
Show Repére Mobile then this curvature vector is drawn,
together with its past history, in each normal plane. – The
last entry in the Action Menu, Show Frenet Integration
does the opposite: if the curvature vector function is given
in the initial normal plane then the demo reconstructs the
curve by integrating the Frenet equation.
H.K.

2

